https://www.pcmag.com/feature/362167/how-to-revive-windows-10-with-a-recovery-drive

How to Revive Windows 10 With a Recovery Drive
A recovery drive stores a copy of your Windows 10 environment on an external source, like a DVD or USB drive. Here's how to create one before your PC goes kaput.

 How to Revive Windows 10 With a Recovery Drive
Your Windows 10 system won't boot up and can't even fix itself. Are you out luck? Not if you've already created a recovery drive.

A recovery drive stores a copy of your Windows 10 environment on another source, such as a DVD or USB drive. Then if Windows 10 goes kerflooey, you can restore it from that drive. The downside is that neither your personal files nor your desktop applications come along for the ride. But you should already be backing up your personal files using tools like File History. And the recovery drive at least brings Windows 10 back to a bootable and working state. Here's how to get started.

Setting Up a Recovery Drive
First off, you'll want to set up the Recovery Drive while Windows is still alive and working so you capture it at its best. To get started, insert a USB drive or DVD into your computer. Launch Windows 10 and type Recovery Drive at the Cortana search field and then click on the match to "Create a recovery drive" (or open Control Panel in icon view, click on the icon for Recovery, and click the link to "Create a recovery drive.") Answer Yes if Windows asks if you want to allow this app to make changes to your device. At the Create a recovery drive screen, click on the checkbox to "Backup system files to the recovery drive." Then click Next.

Select the Recovery Drive
Wait for Windows to pick up the USB drive or DVD. At the next screen, Windows should display the drive you chose, telling you how much free space you need on it. Make sure the right drive is selected and click Next.

Create the Recovery Drive
The next screen tells you that everything on the recovery drive will be deleted, so make sure no needed files are on the USB drive or DVD. Click Create.

Finalize the recovery Drive
The next screen shows the progress of the recovery drive as it is being created. This process may take a long time, so be patient. After the drive has been created, the next screen tells you that the recovery drive is ready. Click Finish.


Using the Recovery Drive
Now, let's fast forward to a time when Windows is so damaged that it's unable to load or repair itself. Insert your recovery USB drive or DVD into your computer. Upon bootup, press the appropriate key to boot from the USB drive or DVD instead of your hard drive.

Select Your Language
At the keyboard layout screen, select the keyboard for your language or country. Press Enter.

Troubleshoot
At the "Choose an option" screen, click on the Troubleshoot button.

Recover Windows
At the Troubleshoot screen, click on the button to "Recover from a drive."

Remove Files
At the Recover from a drive screen, click on the button to "Just remove my files."

Recover Files
At the next Recover from a drive screen, click on the Recover button.

Finalize recovery
Windows will then tell you that it's recovering your PC. When it is finished Windows is officially reinstalled.

Set Up Windows 10
Windows 10 then takes you through the setup process and applies any updates. After setup is finished, you can sign into Windows. Again, your personal files won't be here, but hopefully you've backed those up elsewhere so you can now restore them. You'll also need to reinstall your desktop applications.

System Image Backup
Besides the Recovery Drive, another recovery option in Windows is the System Image Backup. This method allows you to create an image of your entire Windows environment, including your personal files and applications. But you'll need to create this image on a regular basis to make sure it stays current. You can also create a System Repair Disc to boot up your PC if Windows won't boot. By having both a Recovery Drive and a System Image, you can ensure that you're able to revive Windows 10 if it can't revive itself.

